.ig

  Copyright (c) 2019 Apple Inc.  All Rights Reserved.

..
.Dd September 10, 2019
.Os "Darwin"
.Dt DEPINFO 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm depinfo
.Nd Xcode dependency info file utility
.\"  SYNOPSIS
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar file
.Ar ...
.\"  DESCRIPTION
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility displays the contents of Xcode Dependency Info files created by
.Xr ld 1
and
.Xr libtool 1
tools.
.\"  XCODE DEPENDENCY INFO FILES
.Sh XCODE DEPENDENCY INFO FILES
The Xcode Dependency Info file format is a series of variable length records.
Each record begins with a single byte, or opcode, indicating the type of the
record. Opcodes are followed by a single null-terminated C string. The content
of the C string depends on the opcode, and is typically an absolute path to
a location on disk.
.Pp
Opcodes include
.\" .Bl -tag -width "0x40" -compact -offset indent
.\" .It 0x00
.\" .It Tool
.\" one
.\" .It 0x10 Input Found
.\" two
.\" .It 0x11 Input Missing
.\" three
.\" .It 0x40 Output
.\" number of disk
.\" .El
.Bl -column ".Em Opcode" ".Em Input Missing" ".Em External" -offset indent
.It Xo
.Em "Opcode" Ta Em "Name" Ta Em "String"
.Xc
.It "0x00" Ta "Tool" Ta
A string describing the tool that produced the dependency information. The
content and format of the string will vary between tools.
.It "0x10" Ta "Input Found" Ta
An absolute path to an existing file used directly or indirectly to build the
output file.
.It "0x11" Ta "Input Missing" Ta
An absolute path to a file on disk that was looked for but not found; if a
file was found at that location it would have been used as input.
.It "0x40" Ta "Output" Ta
An absolute path to the file generated by the tool.
.El
.\"  SEE ALSO
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ld 1 ,
.Xr libtool 1
