.\"	$OpenBSD: gprof.1,v 1.4 1996/10/15 23:55:56 deraadt Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: gprof.1,v 1.6 1995/11/21 22:24:55 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)gprof.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.TH GPROF 1 "July 28, 2005" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
gprof \- display call graph profile data
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gprof
[ \fIoptions\fR ] [ a.out [ gmon.out ... ] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I gprof
produces an execution profile of a C, Pascal, or Fortran77 program.
The effect of called routines is incorporated in the profile of each caller.
The profile data is taken from the call graph profile file
.RI ( gmon.out
by default), which is created by programs
compiled with the
.B \-pg
option of
.IR cc ,
.IR pc ,
and
.IR f77 .
The symbol table in the
named object file
.RI ( a.out
by default)
is read and correlated with the
call graph profile file.
If more than one profile file is specified,
the
.I gprof
output shows the sum of the profile information in the given profile files.
.PP
First, a flat profile is given.
This listing gives the total execution times
and call counts for each of the functions
in the program, sorted by decreasing time.
.PP
Next, these times are propagated along the edges of the call graph.
Cycles are discovered, and calls into a cycle are made to share the time
of the cycle.
A second listing shows the functions
sorted according to the time they represent
including the time of their call graph descendents.
Below each function entry is shown its (direct) call graph children,
and how their times are propagated to this function.
A similar display above the function shows how this function's time and the
time of its descendents is propagated to its (direct) call graph parents.
.PP
Cycles are also shown, with an entry for the cycle as a whole as well as a
listing of the members of the cycle and their contributions to the
time and call counts of the cycle.
.SH "UNIVERSAL FILE SUPPORT"
.I gprof
accepts a ``universal'' file for the
.I a.out
file, using the host architecture from the file.  (It is an error if the
``universal'' file does not contain the host architecture.)
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
The following options are available:
.TP
.B \-a
suppresses the displaying of statically declared functions.
If this option is given, all relevant information about the static function
(such as time samples, calls to other functions, calls from other functions)
belongs to the function loaded just before the static function in the
.I a.out
file.
.TP
.B \-b
suppresses the displaying of a description of each field in the profile.
.TP
.B \-c
the static call graph of the program is discovered by a heuristic
which examines the text space of the object file.
Static-only parents or children are indicated
with call counts of 0.  (The
.B \-c
option is currently not supported.)
.TP
.BI \-e " name"
suppresses the displaying of the graph profile entry for routine
.I name
and all its descendants
(unless they have other ancestors that aren't suppressed).
More than one
.B \-e
option may be given.
Only one
.I name
may be given with each
.B \-e
option.
.TP
.BI \-E " name"
suppresses the displaying of the graph profile entry for routine
.I name
(and its descendants) as
.BR \-e ,
above, and also excludes the time spent in
.I name
(and its descendants) from the total and percentage time computations.
(For example,
.B \-E
.I mcount
and all of the other
.IR monitor (3)
routines are excluded by default.)
.TP
.BI \-f " name"
displays the graph profile entry of only the specified routine
.I name
and its descendants.
More than one
.B \-f
option may be given.
Only one
.I name
may be given with each
.B \-f
option.
.TP
.BI \-F " name"
displays the graph profile entry of only the routine
.I name
and its descendants (as
.BR \-f,
above) and also uses only the times of the displayed routines
in total time and percentage computations.
More than one
.B \-F
option may be given.
Only one
.I name
may be given with each
.B \-F
option.
The
.B \-F
option
overrides
the
.B \-E
option.
.TP
.B \-s
a profile file
.I gmon.sum
is produced which represents
the sum of the profile information in all the specified profile files.
This summary profile file may be given to subsequent
executions of gprof (probably also with a
.BR \-s )
to accumulate profile data across several runs of an
.I a.out
file.
.TP
.B \-S
produces four order files suitable as input to
.IR ld (1):
.I gmon.order
is an ordering based on a closest is best algorithm,
.I callf.order
is based on call frequency,
.I callo.order
is based on call order and
.I time.order
is based on time.
The order files contain only those functions which were called or
sampled (including spontaneous functions). For library functions to
appear correctly in the order file, a
.I whatsloaded
file produced by
.IR ld (1)
should exist in the working directory. Filenames in the order file
will be missing for: files compiled without the
.BR \-g
option, assembly files, and stripped executables.
This option does not work with executables that have already been scattered.
The
.I gmon.order
file can take a long time to produce and can be suppressed with the
.B \-x
option.
.TP
.B \-z
displays routines which have zero usage (as indicated by call counts
and accumulated time).
This is useful in conjunction with the
.B \-c
option for discovering which routines were never called.
.SH FILES
.ta 1.5i
a.out
the namelist and text space.
.br
gmon.out
dynamic call graph and profile.
.br
gmon.sum
summarized dynamic call graph and profile.
.br
gmon.order
ordering based on closest is best algorithm.
.br
callf.order
ordering based on call frequency.
.br
callo.order
ordering based on call order.
.br
time.order
ordering based on time.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
monitor(3), profil(2), cc(1)
.br
dyld(1) and the DYLD_IMAGE_SUFFIX environment variable
.br
``gprof: A Call Graph Execution Profiler'', by
Graham, S.L., Kessler, P.B., McKusick, M.K.;
.IR "Proceedings of the SIGPLAN '82 Symposium on Compiler Construction" ,
SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 120-126, June 1982.
.SH BUGS
Beware of quantization errors.
The granularity of the sampling is shown, but remains
statistical at best.
We assume that the time for each execution of a function
can be expressed by the total time for the function divided
by the number of times the function is called.
Thus the time propagated along the call graph arcs to parents of that
function is directly proportional to the number of times that
arc is traversed.
.PP
Parents which are not themselves profiled will have the time of
their profiled children propagated to them, but they will appear
to be spontaneously invoked in the call graph listing, and will
not have their time propagated further.
Similarly, signal catchers, even though profiled, will appear
to be spontaneous (although for more obscure reasons).
Any profiled children of signal catchers should have their times
propagated properly, unless the signal catcher was invoked during
the execution of the profiling routine, in which case all is lost.
.PP
The profiled program must call
.IR exit (2)
or return normally for the profiling information to be saved
in the
.B gmon.out
file.
