.TH NSModule 3 "October 6, 2003" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
NSModule \- programmatic interface for working with modules and symbols
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.PP
#include <mach-o/dyld.h>
.sp .5
typedef void * NSModule;
.sp .5
extern NSModule NSLinkModule(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage,
	const char *moduleName,
	unsigned long options);
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSUnLinkModule(
	NSModule module,
	unsigned long options);
.sp .5
extern const char * NSNameOfModule(
	NSModule m);
.sp .5
extern const char * NSLibraryNameForModule(
	NSModule m);
.sp 2
typedef void * NSSymbol;
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSIsSymbolNameDefined(
	const char *symbolName);
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSIsSymbolNameDefinedWithHint(
	const char *symbolName
	const char *libraryNameHint);
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSIsSymbolNameDefinedInImage(
	const struct mach_header *image,
	const char *symbolName);
.sp .5
extern NSSymbol NSLookupAndBindSymbol(
	const char *symbolName);
.sp .5
extern NSSymbol NSLookupAndBindSymbolWithHint(
	const char *symbolName
	const char *libraryNameHint);
.sp .5
extern NSSymbol NSLookupSymbolInModule(
	NSModule module,
	const char *symbolName);
.sp .5
extern NSSymbol NSLookupSymbolInImage(
	const struct mach_header *image,
	const char *symbolName,
	unsigned long options);
.sp .5
extern const char * NSNameOfSymbol(
	NSSymbol symbol);
.sp .5
extern void * NSAddressOfSymbol(
	NSSymbol symbol);
.sp .5
extern NSModule NSModuleForSymbol(
	NSSymbol symbol);
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSAddLibrary(
	const char *pathName);
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSAddLibraryWithSearching(
	const char *pathName);
.sp .5
extern const struct mach_header * NSAddImage(
	const char *image_name,
	unsigned long options);
.sp .5
extern long NSVersionOfRunTimeLibrary(
	const char *libraryName);
.sp .5
extern long NSVersionOfLinkTimeLibrary(
	const char *libraryName);
.sp .5
extern int _NSGetExecutablePath(
	char *buf,
	unsigned long *bufsize)
.sp 2
extern void NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers(
	NSLinkEditErrorHandlers *handlers);
.sp .5
extern void NSLinkEditError(
	NSLinkEditErrors *c,
	int *errorNumber,
	const char **fileName,
	const char **errorString);
.if
.SH "FUTURE SYNOPSIS"
.nf
.PP
extern NSModule NSReplaceModule(
	NSModule moduleToReplace,
	NSObjectFileImage newObjectFileImage,
	unsigned long options);
.fi
.PP
These routines are the programmatic interface for working with modules and
symbols in a program.  A program is composed of a set of images, an executable,
plugins, and dynamic shared libraries.  An image which is an executable or a
plugin is composed of one module containing a collection of symbols.  A dynamic
shared library is composed of one or more modules with each of those modules
containing a separate collection of symbols.  If a symbol is used from a module
then all the symbols from that module are used.
.PP
When a program is executed it selectively binds the symbols it needs from the
modules in the dynamic libraries that are loaded.  Normally a program is
staticly linked against a set of dynamic shared libraries when it is built.
So when the program is executed the dynamic linker will automaticly load those
dynamic shared libraries.
.PP
A program may programmatically load plugins after it starts executing and that
is done with two sets of API's.  The first is the API's of
.IR NSObjectFileImage (3)
and the second is
.I NSLinkModule.
Unlike modules in the dynamic libraries when a plugin is loaded it is not
selectively bound to but always bound into the program.
.PP
.I NSLinkModule
links the specified object file image into the program and returns the module
handle for it.
Currently the implementation is limited to only Mach-O MH_BUNDLE types which
are used for plugins.
A module name is specified when a module is linked so that later
.I NSNameOfModule
can be used with the module handle and to do things like report errors.
If you want
.IR gdb (1)
to be able to debug your module, when calling
.I NSLinkModule
you should pass the image path as the module name.
When a module is linked, all libraries referenced by the module are added to
the list of libraries to be searched.
The parameter,
.I options,
can have a set of options or'ed together.  The options for
.I NSLinkModule
are as follows:
.TP
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_NONE
This specifies no options.  With this the global symbols from the module are
made part of the global symbol table of the program.  If any errors occur the
handlers installed with
.I NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers
are called or the default action is taken if there are no handlers.
.TP
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_BINDNOW
This option causes the dynamic link editor to bind all undefined references for
the loaded module and not allow references to be bound as needed.  This affects
all the references in the module and all of the dependent references.
.TP
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_PRIVATE
With this option the global symbols from the module are not made part of
the global symbol table of the program.  The global symbols of the
module can then be looked up using
.I NSLookupSymbolInModule.
.TP
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_RETURN_ON_ERROR
With this option if errors occur while binding this module it is automaticly
unloaded and
.SM NULL
is returned as the module handle.  To get the error information for the module
that failed to load the routine
.I NSLinkEditError
is then used.  It has the same parameters as the link edit error handler (see
below) except all the parameters are pointers in which the information is
returned indirectly.
.TP
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_DONT_CALL_MOD_INIT_ROUTINES
With this option the module init routines are not called.  This is only useful
to the fix-and-continue implementation.
.TP
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_TRAILING_PHYS_NAME
With this option the parameter,
.I moduleName
is assumed to be a string with the logical name of the image with the physical
name of the object file tailing after the NULL character of the logical name.
This is only useful to the zero-link implementation.
.PP
.I NSUnLinkModule
unlinks the specified module handle from the program.  Currently the
implementation is limited to only allow modules linked with
.I NSLinkModule
to be unlinked.  The parameter,
.I options,
can have a set of options or'ed together.  The options for
.I NSUnLinkModule
are as follows:
.TP
.B NSUNLINKMODULE_OPTION_NONE
This specifies no options.  With this the module is unlinked from the program
and the memory for the module is deallocated.  If any errors occur the
handlers installed with
.I NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers
are called or the default action is taken if there are no handlers.
.TP
.B NSUNLINKMODULE_OPTION_KEEP_MEMORY_MAPPED
With this option the memory for the module is not deallocated allowing pointers
into the module to still be valid.
.TP
.B NSUNLINKMODULE_OPTION_RESET_LAZY_REFERENCES
With this option any lazy references (direct function calls) to symbols defined
in the module are reset to be bound on first call again and not cause any
undefined symbol errors.  Currently this is only implemented for the PowerPC
architecture.
.PP
.I NSNameOfModule
is passed a module handle and returns the name of the module.  If the module
handle is invalid
.SM NULL
is returned.
.PP
.I NSLibraryNameForModule
is passed a module handle and returns the name of the library the module is in
if any.  If the module handle is for a module that is not in a library (in the
executable or a plugin) or the module handle is invalid
.SM NULL
is returned.
.PP
.I NSIsSymbolNameDefined
is passed a global symbol name (global 'C' symbols names are preceded with an
underbar '\_') and returns
.SM TRUE
or
.SM FALSE
based on if the symbol is defined in the program's global symbol table.
If the symbol is not defined no error occurs.
.PP
.I NSIsSymbolNameDefinedWithHint
is the same as
.I NSIsSymbolNameDefined
but the
.I libraryNameHint
parameter provides a hint as to where to start the lookup in a prebound
program.  The
.I libraryNameHint
parameter is matched up with the actual library install names with
.IR strstr (3).
.PP
.I NSIsSymbolNameDefinedInImage
is passed a pointer to the mach_header of a mach_header structure of a
dynamic library being used by the program and a symbol name.  This returns
.SM TRUE
or FALSE
based on if the symbol is defined in the specified image or one of the image's
sub-frameworks or sub-umbrellas.
If the program was built with the
.IR ld (1)
.B \-force_flat_namespace
flag or executed with the environment variable
.SM DYLD_FORCE_FLAT_NAMESPACE
set and the pointer to a mach_header structure is not of a bundle loaded with
the
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_PRIVATE
option of
.IR NSLinkModule (3)
then the pointer to a mach_header is ignored and the symbol is looked up in
all the images using the first definition if found.
.PP
The image handle parameter for
.I NSLookupSymbolInImage
and
.I NSIsSymbolNameDefinedInImage
is a pointer to a read-only mach header structure of a dynamic library being
used by the program.  Besides the
.IR NSAddImage (3)
routine the pointer to a mach header can also be obtained by using a link editor
defined symbol as in <mach-o/ldsym.h> and described on the
.IR ld (1)
man page.
Also the
.IR dyld (3)
routine
.IR _dyld_get_image_header (3)
and the mach_header pointer arguments to the call back routines called from
.IR _dyld_register_func_for_add_image (3)
routines can also be used.
.PP
.I NSLookupAndBindSymbol
is passed a global symbol name and looks up and binds the symbol into the
program.
It returns an NSSymbol for the symbol.  If any errors occur the handlers
installed with
.I NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers
are called or the default action is taken if there are no handlers.
.PP
.I NSLookupAndBindSymbolWithHint
is the same as
.I NSLookupAndBindSymbol
but the
.I libraryNameHint
parameter provides a hint as to where to start the lookup in a prebound
program.  The
.I libraryNameHint
parameter is matched up with the actual library install names with
.IR strstr (3).
.PP
.I NSLookupSymbolInModule
is passed a symbol name and a module handle and looks up the symbol in that
module.  Currently this is only implemented for module handles returned with
.I NSLinkModule.
If the symbol is found an NSSymbol for the symbol is returned otherwise
.SM NULL
is returned and no error occurs.
.PP
.I NSLookupSymbolInImage
is passed a pointer to a mach_header structure of a dynamic library being used
by the program and a symbol name.  It returns an NSSymbol for the symbol for
defined in the specified image or the image's sub-frameworks or sub-umbrellas.
If the program was built with the
.IR ld (1)
.B \-force_flat_namespace
flag or executed with the environment variable
.SM DYLD_FORCE_FLAT_NAMESPACE
set and the pointer to a mach_header structure is not of a bundle loaded with
the
.B NSLINKMODULE_OPTION_PRIVATE
option of
.IR NSLinkModule (3)
then the pointer to a mach_header is ignored and the symbol is looked up in
all the images using the first definition found.
If the option
.SM NSLOOKUPSYMBOLINIMAGE_OPTION_RETURN_ON_ERROR
is not used if any errors occur the handlers installed with
.I NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers
are called or the default action is taken if there are no handlers.
The options of
.I NSLookupSymbolInImage
are as follows:
.TP
.B NSLOOKUPSYMBOLINIMAGE_OPTION_BIND
Just bind the non-lazy symbols of module that defines the
.I symbolName
and let all lazy symbols in the module be bound on first call.  This should be
used in the normal case for a trusted module expected to bind without any errors
like a module in a system supplied library.
.TP
.B NSLOOKUPSYMBOLINIMAGE_OPTION_BIND_NOW
Bind all the non-lazy and lazy symbols of module that defines the
.I symbolName
and let all dependent symbols in the needed libraries be bound as needed.  This
would be used for a module that might not be expected bind without errors but
links against only system supplied libraries which are expected to bind without
any errors.
.TP
.B NSLOOKUPSYMBOLINIMAGE_OPTION_BIND_FULLY
Bind all the symbols of the module that defines the
.I symbolName
and all the dependent symbols of all needed libraries.  This should only be
used for things like signal handlers and linkedit error handlers that can't
bind other symbols when executing to handle the signal or error.
.TP
.B NSLOOKUPSYMBOLINIMAGE_OPTION_RETURN_ON_ERROR
With this option if errors occur while binding the module that defines the
.I symbolName
then the module is automaticly unloaded and
.SM NULL
is returned as the NSSymbol.  To get the error information for why the module
that failed to bind the routine
.I NSLinkEditError
is then used.  It has the same parameters as the link edit error handler (see
below) except all the parameters are pointers in which the information is
returned indirectly.
.PP
.I NSNameOfSymbol
is passed an NSSymbol and returns the name of the symbol.
.PP
.I NSAddressOfSymbol
is passed an NSSymbol and returns the address of the symbol.
.PP
.I NSModuleForSymbol
is passed an NSSymbol and returns the NSModule that symbol is defined in.
.PP
.I NSAddLibrary
is passed the file name of a dynamic shared library to be added to the search
list.  If it is successful it returns
.SM TRUE
else it returns
.SM FALSE.
.PP
.I NSAddLibraryWithSearching
is passed the file name of a dynamic shared library to be added to the search
list the file name passed will be effected by the various
.SM DYLD
environment variables as if this library were linked into the program.  If it
is successful it returns
.SM TRUE
else it returns
.SM FALSE.
.PP
.I NSAddImage
is passed the file name of a dynamic shared library to be added to the search
list of the program if not already loaded.  It returns a pointer to the
mach_header structure of the dynamic library being used by the program.
For best performance of this routine if the library is expected to be already
loaded by the program the
.I image_name
should be a full path name and the same as the name recorded by the program.
If it is a symlink then an
.IR open (2)
and an
.IR fstat (2)
are needed to determine it is the same file as one already loaded.
.PP
If the dynamic shared library has not already been loaded it along with all the
needed dependent libraries are loaded.  With the options parameter
.SM NSADDIMAGE_OPTION_NONE
then any error in loading will cause the linkEdit error handler set by
.IR NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers (3)
to be called or the default action of printing the error and exiting to be
taken.  The other options of
.I NSAddImage
are as follows:
.TP
.B NSADDIMAGE_OPTION_RETURN_ON_ERROR
With this option if errors occur while loading this library it is automatically
unloaded and
.SM NULL
is returned.  To get the error information for the library that failed to load
the routine
.I NSLinkEditError
is then used.  It has the same parameters as the link edit error handler (see
below) except all the parameters are pointers in which the information is
returned indirectly.
.TP
.B NSADDIMAGE_OPTION_WITH_SEARCHING
With this option the
.I image_name
passed for the library and all its dependents will be effected by the various
.SM DYLD
environment variables as if this library were linked into the program.
.TP
.B NSADDIMAGE_OPTION_RETURN_ONLY_IF_LOADED
With this option if the
.I image_name
passed for the library has not already been loaded it is not loaded.  Only if
it has been loaded the pointer to the mach_header will not be
.SM NULL.
.TP
.B NSADDIMAGE_OPTION_MATCH_FILENAME_BY_INSTALLNAME
When this option is specified if a later load of a dependent dynamic library
with a file system path is needed by an image that matches the install name of
the dynamic library loaded with this option, then the dynamic library loaded
with the call to NSAddImage() is used in place of the dependent dynamic library.
.PP
.I NSVersionOfRunTimeLibrary
is passed the install name of a dynamic shared library and returns
current_version number of the library the program is using or \-1 if the
program is not using that library.
.PP
.I NSVersionOfLinkTimeLibrary
is passed the install name of a dynamic shared library and returns the
current_version number of the library the executable program was built
with or \-1 if the program was not built with that library.
.PP
.I _NSGetExecutablePath
copies the path of the executable into the buffer and
returns 0 if the path was successfully copied in the provided buffer. If the
buffer is not large enough, \-1 is returned and the expected buffer size is
copied in *bufsize. Note that _NSGetExecutablePath will return "a path" to
the executable not a "real path" to the executable. That is the path may be
a symbolic link and not the real file. And with deep directories the total
bufsize needed could be more than MAXPATHLEN.
.SH ERROR HANDLING
.PP
.I NSInstallLinkEditErrorHandlers
is passed a pointer to a NSLinkEditErrorHandlers which contains three function
pointers to be used for handling dynamic link errors.  The prototypes for these
functions are given in the following typedef:
.RS
.nf
typedef struct {
     void     (*undefined)(const char *symbolName);
     NSModule (*multiple)(NSSymbol s, NSModule oldModule, NSModule newModule);
     void     (*linkEdit)(NSLinkEditErrors errorClass, int errorNumber,
                          const char *fileName, const char *errorString);
} NSLinkEditErrorHandlers;
.fi
.RE
.PP
The first two functions allow the programmer to direct the link edit processing
of undefined symbols and multiply defined symbols.
The third function allows the programmer to catch all other link editor
errors.
.PP
The state when one of the user error functions gets called will be such that no
module will be partially loaded (except in the case of resource errors like out
of memory and other relocation errors).
However, with undefined symbol errors those modules referencing undefined
symbols will be partially bound, and use of such modules can and will crash the
program.
.PP
Great care should be taken when implementing these functions, as the program is
running in a state that will crash if it uses an unbound symbol.
To be safe, these functions should only rely on other things in the same module
or in the executable.
.PP
If the user does not supply these functions, the default will be to write an
error message on to file descriptor 2 (usually stderr) and exit the program
(except for the
.I linkEdit
error handler when the
.I NSLinkEditErrors
is NSLinkEditWarningError, then the default is to do nothing).
.PP
The specified undefined handler may make calls to any of the runtime loading
functions to add modules based on the undefined symbol name.
After dealing with this symbol name successfully (by doing a runtime loading
operation to resolve the undefined reference) the handler simply returns.
If more symbol's names remain undefined the handler will be called repeatedly
with an undefined symbol name.
If the handler can't deal with the symbol it should not return (put up a panel,
abort, etc) and cause the program to exit.
Or it can remove itself as the undefined handler and return which will cause
the default action of printing the undefined symbol names and exiting.
.PP
The specified multiply defined symbol handler is called during the process of
runtime linking and thus it may not call any of the runtime loading functions
as only one set of linking operations can be performed in the task at a time.
The only programmatic functions that can be called from a multiply defined
symbol handler are
.I NSNameOfSymbol,
.I NSNameOfModule
and
.I NSLibraryNameForModule
(provided they are linked into the program before the handler is called).
This handler returns the module handle for the symbol that is to be used for
further link editing, either the
.I oldModule
or the
.I newModule.
It may also record one of the module handles to later take action after the
runtime linking process has completed (for example later unlink the module).
The dynamic link editor updates the references to the symbol if the handler
specifies the new symbol is to be used.
The references which are updated are those that the compiler system generated
as indirect references.  Initialized data and references that were created at
runtime are not effected.
.PP
The specified
.I linkEdit
error handler is called for all other runtime linking errors.
These other runtime linking errors are either warnings or fatal errors.
If the user's link edit error handler function returns
for a fatal error it will cause the program to exit.
There is small set of major error classes which have specific error numbers.
These numbers are be passed in the parameter
.I errorClass.
These major error classes include:
.RS
.nf
typedef enum {
	NSLinkEditFileAccessError,
	NSLinkEditFileFormatError,
	NSLinkEditMachResourceError,
	NSLinkEditUnixResourceError,
	NSLinkEditOtherError,
	NSLinkEditWarningError,
	NSLinkEditMultiplyDefinedError,
	NSLinkEditUndefinedError
} NSLinkEditErrors;
.fi
.RE
.PP
For the error class NSLinkEditUnixResourceError the
.I errorNumber
parameter will be an
.I errno
value (see
.IR intro (2)).
For the error class NSLinkEditMachResourceError the
.I errorNumber
parameter will be a
.I kern_return_t
value.
For the error class NSLinkEditOtherError the
.I errorNumber
parameter will be a one of the following values:
.RS
.nf
typedef enum {
    NSOtherErrorRelocation,
    NSOtherErrorLazyBind,
    NSOtherErrorIndrLoop,
    NSOtherErrorLazyInit,
    NSOtherErrorInvalidArgs
} NSOtherErrorNumbers;
.fi
.RE
.PP
For all errors, an attempt to pass an error string will be made.
In some cases such as resource errors, it may not be possible to return a
string.
In those cases the
.I errorString
parameter will be
.sm NULL.
.PP
For file access errors and file format errors, an attempt to return a file name
will also be passed, and if that is not possible the
.I filename
parameter will be
.sm NULL.
.SH ALSO SEE
NSObjectFileImage(3), dyld(3)
