.TH NSObjectFileImage 3 "March 14, 2003" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
NSObjectFileImage \- programmatic interface for working with Mach-O files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.PP
#include <mach-o/dyld.h>
.sp .5
extern NSObjectFileImageReturnCode NSCreateObjectFileImageFromFile(
	const char *pathName,
	NSObjectFileImage *objectFileImage);
.sp .5
extern NSObjectFileImageReturnCode NSCreateObjectFileImageFromMemory(
	void *address,
	unsigned long size,
	NSObjectFileImage *objectFileImage);
.sp .5
extern NSObjectFileImageReturnCode NSCreateCoreFileImageFromFile(
	const char *pathName,
	NSObjectFileImage *objectFileImage);
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSDestroyObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage);
.sp .5
extern unsigned long NSSymbolDefinitionCountInObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage);
.sp .5
extern const char * NSSymbolDefinitionNameInObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage,
	unsigned long ordinal);
.sp .5
extern unsigned long NSSymbolReferenceCountInObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage);
.sp .5
extern const char * NSSymbolReferenceNameInObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage,
	unsigned long ordinal,
	enum DYLD_BOOL *tentative_definition); /* can be NULL */
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSIsSymbolDefinedInObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage,
	const char *symbolName);
.sp .5
extern void * NSGetSectionDataInObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage,
	const char *segmentName,
	const char *sectionName,
	unsigned long* size); /* can be NULL */
.sp .5
extern enum DYLD_BOOL NSHasModInitObjectFileImage(
	NSObjectFileImage objectFileImage);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These routines are the programmatic interface for working with Mach-O files.
They bring the Mach-O file into memory and the API allows the file to
be inspected or loaded into the program.  On creation of an object file image
it is checked to insure it is a valid format and it is compatible with the host
machine's cpu architecture.
.PP
.I NSCreateObjectFileImageFromFile
takes the parameter
.I pathName
as the path name to the file name in the file system and creates and returns
an NSObjectFileImage.  Currently only
.SM MH_BUNDLE
files can be used with
.I NSCreateObjectFileImageFromFile
which can then be loaded into the program using
.IR NSLinkModule (3).
If the file is valid an NSObjectFileImage is returned and the return code is
NSObjectFileImageSuccess.
.I NSCreateObjectFileImageFromMemory
does the same as
.I NSCreateObjectFileImageFromFile
but takes two parameters
.I address
and
.I size
for the Mach-O file that is in memory.
.PP
.I NSCreateCoreFileImageFromFile
takes the parameter
.I pathName
as the path name to a core file in the file system and creates and returns
an NSObjectFileImage.  This NSObjectFileImage can then can be loaded into a
task with
.IR _dyld_debug_task_from_core (3)
to determine what libraries were loaded and which modules were linked.
.PP
.I NSSymbolDefinitionCountInObjectFileImage
returns the number of symbol definitions in the NSObjectFileImage.
.PP
.I NSSymbolDefinitionNameInObjectFileImage
returns the name of the i'th symbol definitions in the NSObjectFileImage.
The 'C' string returned should not be freed.  If the ordinal specified is
outside the range [0..NSSymbolDefinitionCountInObjectFileImage], NULL will be
returned.
.PP
.I NSSymbolReferenceCountInObjectFileImage
returns the number of references to undefined symbols the NSObjectFileImage.
.PP
.I NSSymbolReferenceNameInObjectFileImage
returns the name of the i'th undefined symbol in the NSObjectFileImage.
The 'C' string returned should not be freed.  If the ordinal specified is
outside the range [0..NSSymbolReferenceCountInObjectFileImage], NULL will be
returned.
.PP
.I NSIsSymbolDefinedInObjectFileImage
returns TRUE if the specified symbol name has a definition in the
NSObjectFileImage.
.PP
.I NSGetSectionDataInObjectFileImage
returns the address of the data for the named section in the named segment in
the NSObjectFileImage.  If the parameter size is not NULL, the size of the
section is returned in size.  If the section cannot be found or a zerofill
section, NULL is returned and the size returned is zero.
.PP
.I NSHasModInitObjectFileImage
returns TRUE if the NSObjectFileImage has any module initialization routines
and FALSE otherwise.

.SH RETURN CODES
The API's that create NSObjectFileImage's return an NSObjectFileImageReturnCode
with the following possible values:
.TP
.B NSObjectFileImageSuccess
Indicates the API was successful and it returned a valid NSObjectFileImage for
the host machine's cpu architecture.
.TP
.B NSObjectFileImageFailure
Indicates the API failed and no NSObjectFileImage was returned.  If this is
returned an error message is printed on stderr as to the reason for the
failure.
.TP
.B NSObjectFileImageInappropriateFile
Indicates the API failed because the file passed to it was not an appropriate
type of object file.
.TP
.B NSObjectFileImageArch
Indicates the API failed because the host machine's cpu architecture could not
be found in the file.
.TP
.B NSObjectFileImageFormat
Indicates the API failed because the Mach-O format was malformed.  If this is
returned an error message is printed on stderr as to the format error.
.TP
.B NSObjectFileImageAccess
Indicates the API failed because the file could not be accessed.
.SH ALSO SEE
NSModule(3), dyld(3)
